Title: La Cosecha del Invierno
Speaker: Guillermo López Martinez
Language: Jumaytepeque
Collector: ?
Date Recorded: ?
Date Transcribed: ?
Date Typed: 08/15/2006
Typed By: ER

<text> 
le dice el tata le dijo
mə́k ša a sawá¢ʼa le dijo
mə́k šaa sawá¢ʼa ˀalokpʼéh le dice 
̓̓ú bar t’i awúkʼi (ʔ), ˹mə́k ša a sawá¢ʼa ˀalokpʼéh (1).
	˹dimílkisawá¢ʼa (ʔ), ˀəlkisápʼa ašə́tʼə (2).
˹dimílkišə́tʼə̥ˀəlkiyákʼa a kálsa (3); 
˹kalsádu bar a wayáʔ, hay ʔóóra (4) wašátʼa ˹bar í (5),
wašátʼa bar í ˹múura (6).  dimi á(a) muuráki̥ ˹ˀáyma bár (7).
maŋ ʔoora kšíwʼi.
dimí lkišíwʼi̥ ˹ˀəlkiwakʼá še etákʼa (8).
˹dimí lkiˀetákʼa, ˀəlkiwawə́əyi, ˀi ˀəlkiyákʼa kʼal bánku,
deeláŋ ˀəlki ˀoróm’o (9).  ˹dimílki ʔetákʼa a wayáʔ (10),
ˀəlkikə́¢ʼa ˹a šin’ák (11).  ˹dimí lkikə́¢ʼa a šin’ák,
maŋ ʔoora ˀəlkiyákʼa a čeetéh, deeláŋ ˀəlkiiša{h/pʼ}∙i̥12).
šin'ák wayá{pʼ/ʔ}.  pwes maŋʔóora ˀəlkitə́mʼa aa máŋ (ʔ), 
dimílkitə́mʼa a mán (ʔ), ˀəlkiutʼúšma ˀáyma. 
wášaranéela sapʼuyalkíŋ.
ná- syénto ʔáyma- ˀíri{ʔ/a}r syénto ˀ{ə/u}htúr'a
a néega.  dimílkiwawə́əya ˀáyma, haŋ ʔoora
ˀəlkiˀə́ma ˹tʼyauták (13), ˀ{ə/u}p{ə/u}šáh kʼal ʔášu.
ʔəpə šáh míya.  ˹déy, dimílki yákʼa a máŋ,
kˀəlkikʼáˀ (14), ša... ˹ša ˀəntʼəlkíŋ (15) a ˹kaštil áyma (16),
haa má bar wéˀ.  kupyákʼa ˹ˀəlk{ə/i}kə́ŋa (17)
kaštil áyma, h{a/ʔ} má bar wéˀ.
yi{n/m}yá ha maˀ, maŋ ʔoora ˀəlkišípʼi̥
y{e/ə}k pár'a kʼal a ˹kumóoso (18), yekʼə́¢ʼa a gabíya.
gabíya, nukʼa yakʼakan tʼih, por taréya.
mə́ŋakyákʼa.   ESTA ES LA COSECHA DEL INVIERNO
</text>
<notes>
1.    mə́k ša a sawá¢ʼa ˀalokpʼéh- <tk> let us to the planting tomorrow </tk> 
2.    dimílkisawá¢ʼa (ʔ), ˀəlkisápʼa ašə́tʼə- <tk> when we plant we take it out that it </tk> 
3.   dimílkišə́tʼə̥ˀəlkiyákʼa a kálsa - <tk> when we --- we make the mound </tk> 
4.    kalsádu bar a wayáʔ, hay ʔoóra- <tk> mounded already the cornfield then/how </tk> 
5.    bar í- <tk> already/how </tk> 
6.    múura- <tk> elote </tk> 
7.    ˀáyma bár- <tk> corn (hav?) </tk> <er> I'm unsure about the second word </tk> 
8.    ˀəlkiwakʼá še etákʼa- <tk> we go in harvest </tk> 
9.     dimí lkiˀetákʼa, ˀəlkiwawə́əyi, ˀi ˀəlkiyákʼa kʼal bánku, deeláŋ ˀəlki ˀorómʼo- <tk> when we harvest we carry it we make one bench so that/for we gather </tk> 
10. dimílki ʔetákʼa a wayáʔ- <tk> when we harvest the cornfield </tk> 
11.  a šin'ák- <tk> the beans </tk> 
12. dimí lkikə́¢ʼa a šin'ák, aŋ ʔoora ˀəlkiyákʼa a čeetéh, deeláŋ ˀəlkiiša{h/pʼ}∙i̥ <tk> when we the beans then we make a corn crib {so that/for} we take it out </tk> 
13. tʼyauták- <tk> /tʼi a utak/ </tk> 
14. déy, dimílki yákʼa a máŋ, kˀəlkikʼáˀ- <tk> then when we do that we go </tk> 
15.  ša ˀəntʼəlkíŋ- <tk> to looking at; ˀəntʼəlkíŋ same as ˀəlk{i/ə}kə́ŋa </tk>
16.  kaštil áyma- <tk> wheat </tk>
17. ˀəlk{ə/i}kə́ŋa- <tk> ˀəntʼəlkíŋ same as ˀəlk{i/ə}kə́ŋa </tk> 
18.  kumóoso- <tk> your helper </tk> 
</notes> 